whereas our native grasses are are long
adapted to the climate that we have here
one of the big constraints is that the
native grasses if you look at the cool
season grasses they're very pliable and
palatable the native grasses are stiffer
and that's because they because nitrogen
and moisture were so limited they
actually build structures in their
leaves they have a different kind of
photosynthesis than our typical forage
grasses so there's a lot of fiber in
this and even actually less fewer
nitrogen rich enzymes for photosynthesis
so our native grasses are just a lot
more efficient in terms of using the
resources here but that doesn't make
them so good for cattle forage so the
idea of what we wanted to try here is
introducing native leggings since these
systems so looking at something that's
complementary to the to the prairies to
boost nitrogen versus adding fertilizer
or even trying to add typical forage
legumes which just with the way their
growing season is it doesn't coincide
very well with what the prairies do so
if you seated in a lot of red clover you
could kind of shade out a lot of the
things that you really wanted in the
Prairie in the long run so we looked at
primarily two things we looked at this
across the diversity gradient so in our
switchgrass monocultures our lowest
diversity just one native species and
then successively more diverse prairies
with more native species incorporated
and what we then we looked at management
so things that we could do to limit the
competition for those legumes two things
so we looked at rotational stocking with
cattle bringing in janet's Holstein
heifers to graze periodically and open
up the canopy and let more light down to
the soil and then we also compared that
to mowing which is a tool that most
farmers could do and many conservation
organizations already do some
so we looked at diversity and the tools
and interceded leggings in a split split
flat design and unfortunately after two
years we basically saw zero recruitment
of leggings there there were seedlings
here and there but from a biological or
ecological forage aspect those those
legumes aren't really a major component
of the system so future research I think
would have to drill down more on timing
of interceding or different kinds of
management to really try to complement
that so we were trying to do a broad
range of things here and that we weren't
able to drill down as well on that but
we were still able to quantify the
forage quality in these different
diversity levels which is something that
we hadn't been able to do for this part
of the country previously and we also
looked at the effects of mowing and
grazing and just typical more hands-off
conservation management just with
prescribed fire on the prairies and what
we found was that grazing didn't really
cause a big change in the plant
community over time so this is
rotational grazing with cattle where
they're allowed to be selective and
choose grasses and legumes actually it
could be integrated with a lot of our
existing conservation lands so we could
do more more adaptive management
research going in the future on that I
think and make our restoration of native
species more economic for all landowners
of all stripes the mowing really
depressed a lot of our native forbs so
if you look out across here
the tall species with brought these that
you see standing up those are native
sunflowers we see some there's some
yellow coneflower
already flowering here goldenrods so
those are really important species for
pollinators and they help support the
food web with all the insects that they
support so we like to see those but in
some cases things like Canada goldenrod
can be a real problem in our perennial
grasslands and mowing that twice during
the summer really started to depress
some of those more weedy species so I
think what's exciting about this project
is it starts to scratch the surface more
on some of the more active management we
could be taking with our native
grasslands so not just burning and you
know doing some hand cutting to get rid
of shrubs but mowing and grazing and
different combinations of these things
could really start to create more niches
for different kinds of plants and
wildlife and also I think helped to
integrate these types of community
communities more into working farms
where people also need to be able to
make a profit off of the land that they
have out there